---
layout: post
title: Pivoting expectations in data analysis
subtitle: A journey through different hypotheses in archery data.
---


The scope of this data exploration and analysis changed several times over a couple of weeks. I originally requested World Archery API access without any particular data in mind, but during the emails with Chris Wells, my contact at World Archery, we agreed that an interesting place to start would be historical data regarding the Olympics, and how the Olympics affects arrow averages in tournaments before, during, and after the Olympics themselves.

##The Olympics
I began by taking making an API call that would return all competitions within a given time frame, starting off in the year the Rio Summer Olympics too place. It was this point when I started to realize the sort of state the data was in.
```json
{
  "pageInfo": {
    "totalResults": 1339,
    "resultsPerPage": 10,
    "page": 0
  },
  "items": [...
```
However, after a bit of looking, I realized a lot of these competition entries had no data associated with them. No results turned in. Luckily there was an option to perform the API in such a way that only competitions with results would return.

```json
{
  "pageInfo": {
    "totalResults": 35,
    "resultsPerPage": 10,
    "page": 0
  },
  "items": [...
 ```
 Over 1300 results eliminated with no useful data to us. Only 35 events remained out of 1339.





The analysis of tournament data from 2014-2018 was not fruitful for this specific hypothesis, that the olympics in some way affected archery arrow averages. In fact the Olympics seemed to be a perfectly standard archery event as far as averages go.

However, to figure that out, I had to see what was typical for each year. I plotted each year's averages on top of each other and it showed a significant seasonal bias, with peaks in April and October, and a major trough in July (and presumably around the holidays, when no tournaments take place)

So in order to confirm this, I looked at averages from Qualifier rounds, which gave me more data than just the matches alone did. This seasonal bias on the world cup level was a lot less pronounced, but still there. However filtering the data and excluding world cup events, this july trough is virtually non-existant.

This caused me to pivot my hypothesis again, this time leaning towards something in the world cup, in the summer months, causing this minor dip. I separated out the data and unfortunately, this is where my trail ends. Despite my best efforts, I was unable to determine any sort of cause for this dip, but it is consistent over several years.


